the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius section 14 the philosophy of Antoninus by George long ma
This is a LibriVox recording all LibriVox recordings are in the public domain
For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox org
read by ML Cohen Cleveland, Ohio June
the philosophy of Antoninus by George long ma
It has been said that stoic philosophy first showed its real value when it passed from Greece to Rome
The doctrines of Zeno and his successors were well suited to the gravity and practical good sense of the Romans and even in the Republican
Period we have an example of a man M. Cato Utensis who lived the life of a stoic and died consistently with the opinions
which he professed
He was a man says Cicero who embraced the stoic philosophy from conviction not for the purpose of vain discussion as most did
but in order to make his life conformable to the stoic precepts in
The wretched time from the death of Augustus to the murder of Domitian
There was nothing but stoic philosophy which could console and support the followers of the old religion
under imperial tyranny and amidst universal corruption
There were even then noble minds that could dare and endure sustained by good conscious and elevated idea of the purposes of man's existence
Such were paid as they see a held videos precious
Cornutus see Mussonius refus and the poets Perseus and juvenile whose energetic language and manly thoughts may be as instructive to us
Now as they might have been to their contemporaries
Perseus died under Nero's bloody reign
But juvenile had the good fortune to survive the tyrant Domitian and to see the better times of Nerva Trajan and Hadrian
His best precepts are derived from the stoic school and they are enforced in his finest verses by the unrivaled vigor of the Latin language
The two best expounders of the later stoical philosophy were a Greek slave and a Roman Emperor
Epictetus a Phrygian Greek was brought to Rome
We know not how he was there the slave and afterwards the freed man of an unworthy master
Epaphroditus by name himself a free man and a favorite of Nero
Epictetus may have been a hearer of see Mussonius Rufus while he was still a slave
But he could hardly have been a teacher before he was made free
He was one of the philosophers whom Domitian's order banished from Rome
He retired to Nicopolis and Nippuris and he may have died there
Like other great teachers
He wrote nothing and we are indebted to his grateful pupil Arian for what we have of Epictetus's discourses
Arian wrote eight books of the discourses of Epictetus of which only four remain and some fragments
We also have from Arian's hand the small Enchiridion or manual or the chief precepts of Epictetus
There is a valuable commentary on the Enchiridion by Simplicis who lived at the time of the Emperor Justinian
Antoninus in his first book in which he gratefully
Commentaries his obligations to his teachers says that he was made acquainted by Junius Rusticus with the discourses of Epictetus
Whom he mentions also in other passages
indeed the doctrines of Epictetus and Antoninus are the same and
Epictetus is the best authority for the explanation of the philosophical language of Antoninus and the exposition of his opinions
But the method of the two philosophers is entirely different
Epictetus addressed himself to his hearers in a continuous discourse and in a familial and simple manner
Antoninus wrote down his reflections for his own use only in
Short-unconnected paragraphs which are often obscure
The Stoics made three divisions of philosophy
Physic, Ethic and Logic
This division we are told by Diogenes was made by Zeno of Sidium the founder of the Stoic sect and by Chrysippus
But these philosophers placed the three divisions in the following order
Logic, Physic, Ethic
It appears however that this division was made before Zeno's time and acknowledged by Plato as Cicero remarks
Logic is not synonymous with our term logic in the narrow sense of that word
Cleanthes, a Stoic subdivided the three divisions and made six
Dialectic and rhetoric comprised in logic
Ethic and politic, Physic and theology. This division was merely for practical use for all philosophy as one
Even among the earliest Stoics logic or dialectic does not occupy the same place as in Plato
It is considered only as an instrument which is to be used for the other divisions of philosophy
An exposition of the earlier Stoic doctrines and of their modifications would require a volume
My object is to explain only the opinions of Antoninus so far as they can be collected from his book
According to the subdivision of Cleanthes
Physic and theology go together or the study of the nature of things and the study of the nature of the deity
So far as man can understand the deity and of his government of the universe
This division or subdivision is not formally adopted by Antoninus for as already observed
There is no method in his book, but it is virtually contained in it
Cleanthes also connects ethic and politic or the study of principles of morals and the study of the Constitution of civil society and
Undoubtedly he did well in subdividing ethic into two parts
Ethic in a narrower sense and politic for though the two are intimately connected
They are also very distinct and many questions can only be properly discussed by carefully observing the distinction
Antoninus does not treat of politic his subject is ethic an ethic in its practical application to his own
Conduct in life as a man and as a governor
His ethic is founded on the doctrines about man's nature the universal nature and the relations of every man
to everything else
It is therefore intimately and inseparably connected with physics or the nature of things and with theology or the nature of the deity
He advises us to examine well all the impressions on our minds and to form a right judgment of them to make just
Conclusions and to inquire into the meanings of words and so far to apply dialectic
But he has no attempt at any exposition of dialectic and his philosophy is in substance purely moral and practical
He says quote
Constantly and if it be possible on the occasion of every impression on the soul apply it to the principles of physics of ethic and of
dialectic end quote
Which is only another way of telling us to examine the impression in every possible way
In another passage he says quote to the age which had been mentioned let this one still be added
Make for thyself a definition or description of the object which is presented to thee so as to see
Distinctly what kind of a thing it is in its substance in its nudity in its complete entirety and tell thyself its proper name and the
Names of the things which it has been compounded and into which it will be resolved end quote
Such an examination implies a use of dialectic which Antoninus accordingly employed as a mean towards establishing his physical
theological and ethical principles
There are several expositions of the physical theological and ethical principles which are contained in the work of Antoninus
and more expositions than I have read
Ritter after explaining the doctrines of Epictetus treats very briefly and insufficiently those of Antoninus
But he refers to a short essay in which the work is done better
There is also an essay on the philosophical principles of M. Aurelius Antoninus by J.M
Schultz placed at the end of his German translation of Antoninus
With the assistance of these two useful essays in his own diligent study a man may form a sufficient notion of the principles of Antoninus
But he will find it more difficult to expound them to others
besides the want of arrangement in the original and of connection among the numerous paragraphs the corruption of the text the
obscurity of the language and the style and sometimes perhaps the confusion the writers own ideas besides all this there is occasionally an apparent
Contradiction in the Emperor's thoughts as if his principles were sometimes unsettled as if doubt sometimes clouded his mind a
Man who leads a life of tranquility and reflection
Who was not disturbed at home and metals not with the affairs of the world may keep his mind at ease and his thoughts in?
one even course
But such a man has not been tried
All his ethical philosophy and his passive virtue might turn out to be idle words if you were once exposed to the rude realities of human existence
Fine thoughts and moral dissertations from men who have not worked and suffered may be read, but they will be forgotten
No religion no ethical philosophy is worth anything if the teacher has not lived the quote life of an apostle end quote
And has been ready to die quote the death of a martyr end quote
Quote not in passivity the passive affects
But in activity lie the evil and the good of the rational social animal just as his virtue and his vice lie not in
passivity but in activity
end quote
Section 9 paragraph 16 the Emperor Antoninus was a practical moralist from his youth
He followed the laborious discipline and though his high station placed him above all want or the fear of it
He lived as frugally and as temperately as the poorest philosopher
Epictetus wanted little and it seems that he always had the little that he wanted and he was content with it as he has been
with his servile station
But Antoninus after his accession to the Empire sat on an uneasy seat
He had the administration of an empire which extended from the Euphrates to the Atlantic
From the cold mountains of Scotland to the hot sands of Africa and we may imagine though
We cannot know it by experience
What must be the trials the troubles the anxiety and the sorrows of him who has the world's business on his hands with the wish
To do the best he can and the certain knowledge that he can do very little of the good which he wishes
In the midst of war
Pestilence
Conspiracy general corruption and with the weight of so unwieldy an empire upon him
We may easily comprehend that Antoninus often had need of all his fortitude to support him
The best and bravest men have moments of doubt and of weakness
But if they are the best and the bravest they rise again from their depression by recurring to first principles as Antoninus does
The Emperor says that life is smoke a vapor and st
James and his epistle is of the same mind that the world is full of envious jealous malignant people and a man might well be
content to get out of it
He has doubts perhaps sometimes even about that to which he holds most firmly
There are only a few passages of this kind but they are the evidence of struggles
which even the noblest of the sons of men had to maintain against the hard realities of his daily life a
Poor remark it is which I have seen somewhere and made in a disparaging way that the Emperor's reflection showed that he had need of
Consolation and comfort in life and even to prepare him to meet his death
True that he did need comfort and support and we see how he found it
He constantly recurs to his fundamental principle that the universe is wisely ordered that every man is a part of it and must
Conform to that order which he cannot change that whatever the deed
He has done is good that all mankind or a man's brethren that he must love and cherish them and try to make them better
Even those who would do him harm
This is his conclusion
Quote
What then is that which is able to conduct a man one thing and only one philosophy?
But this consists in keeping the divinity within a man free from violence and unharmed
Superior to pains and pleasures doing nothing without a purpose nor yet falsely and with hypocrisy
not feeling the need of another man's doing or not doing anything and
Besides accepting all that happens and all that is allotted as coming from thence wherever it is for once he himself came
And finally waiting for death with a cheerful mind as being nothing else than a dissolution of the elements of which every living being is
compounded
But if there is no harm to the elements themselves and each continually changing into another
Why should the man have any apprehension about the change and dissolution of all the elements himself?
For it is according to nature and nothing is evil that is according to nature
end quote
The physics of Antoninus is the knowledge of the nature of the universe of its government and of the relation of man's nature to both
He names the universe quote the universal substance end quote and he adds that quote reason end quote
Covers the universe he also uses the term quote universal nature end quote or quote nature of the universe end quote
He calls the universe
Quote the one and all which we name cosmos or order end quote
If he ever seems to use these general terms as significant of the all of all that man can in any way conceived to exist
He's still on other occasion plainly distinguishes between matter material things and cause origin reason
This is conformable to Zeno's doctrine that there are two original principles of all things that which acts and that which is acted upon
That which is acted on is the formless matter that which acts is the reason
God who is eternal and operates through all matter and produces all things
So Antoninus speaks of the reason which pervades all substance and through all time by fixed periods parentheses
revolutions and parentheses it ministers the universe
God is eternal and matter is eternal
It is God who gives form to matter, but he is not said to have created matter
According to this view which is as old as an hexagoras God and matter exist independently, but God governs mattered
This doctrine is simply the expression of the fact of the existence both of matter and of God
The Stoics did not perplex themselves with the insoluble question of the origin and nature of matter
Antoninus also assumes a beginning of things as we now know them, but his language is sometimes very obscure
I have endeavored to explain the meaning of one difficult passage
Matter consists of elemental parts of which all material objects are made, but nothing is permanent in form
The nature of the universe according to Antoninus expression
Quote loves nothing so much as to change the things which are and to make new things like them
For everything that exists is in a manner the seed of that which will be
But thou art thinking only of seeds which are cast into the earth or into a womb, but this is a very vulgar notion
end quote
All things then are in a constant flux and change
Some things are dissolved into the elements others come in their places and so quote the whole universe continues ever young and perfect
end quote
Antoninus has some obscure expressions about what he calls quote seminal principles end quote
He opposes these to the Epicurean Abans and
Consequently quote his seminal principles end quote are not material atoms which wander about at hazard and combined nobody knows how
In one passage he speaks of living principles
souls after the dissolution of their bodies being received into the quote seminal principle of the universe and
Schultz thinks that by quote seminal principles Antoninus means the relation of the various elemental principles
Which relations are determined by the deity and by which alone the production of organized beings is possible end quote
This may be the meaning, but if it is nothing of any value can be derived from it
Antoninus often uses the word quote nature end quote and we must attempt to fix its meaning
Simple etymological sense is quote production end quote the birth of what we call things
The Romans use natura which also means birth originally
But neither the Greeks nor Romans stuck to the simple meaning nor do we
Antoninus says quote whether the universe is a concourse of atoms or nature as a system
Let this first be established that I am part of the whole which is governed by nature end quote
Here it might seem as if nature were personified and viewed as an active efficient power
As something which if not independent of the deity acts by a power which is given to it by the deity
Such if I understand the expression right is the way in which the word nature is often used now
Though it is plain that many writers use the word without fixing any exact meaning to it
It is the same with the expression laws of nature which some writers may use in an intelligible sense
But others as clearly use in no definite sense at all
There is no meaning in this word nature except that which Bishop Butler signs to it when he says quote
The only distinct meaning of that word natural is stated fixture settled since what is natural as much requiring presupposes an intelligent agent to render
It so ie to affect it continually or its stated times as what is supernatural or miraculous does to affect it at once end quote
This is Plato's meaning when he says that God holds the beginning and end and middle of all that exists
And proceeds straight on his course making his circuit according to nature
Friends that is by fixed order and friends and he is continually accompanied by justice who punishes those who deviate from the divine law
that is
From the order or course which God observes
When we look at the motion of the planets the action of what we call gravitation
The elemental combination of unorganized bodies in the resolution the production of plants and of living bodies their generation growth in their
Solution which we call the death we observe a regular sequence of phenomena
Which within the limits of experience presence and past so far as we know the past is fixed and invariable
But if this is not so if the order and sequence of phenomena as known to us are subject to change in the course of an
Infinite progression and such change is conceivable we have nor discovered not shall
We ever discover the whole of the order and sequence of phenomena in which sequence there may be involved according to its very nature
That is according to its fixed order some variation of which we now call order or the nature of things
It is also conceivable that such changes have taken place
Changes in the order of things as we are compelled by the imperfection of language to call them which are no changes
And further it is certain that our knowledge of the true sequence of all actual phenomena as for instance the phenomena of generation
Growth and dissolution is and ever must be imperfect
We do not fare much better when we speak of causes and effects than when we speak of nature
For the practical purposes of life we may use the terms cause and effect
Conveniently and we may fix a distinct meaning to them distinct enough at least to prevent all misunderstanding
But the case is different when we speak of causes and effects as of things
All that we know is that phenomena as a griefs called them or
Appearances which follow one another in a regular order as we conceive it so that if someone
Phenomena should fail in the series we can see that there must either be an interruption of the series or that something else will appear
after the phenomena which has failed to appear and will occupy the vacant place and
So the series in this progression may be modified or totally changed
Cause and effect then mean nothing in a sequence of natural phenomena beyond what I've said and the real cause or the
Transcendent cause as some would call it of each success of phenomena is in that which is the cause of all things
Which are which have been and which will be forever
Thus the word creation may have a real sense if we consider it as the first
If we can conceive a first in the present order of natural phenomenon
But in the vulgar sense of creation of all things at a certain time
Followed by a quiescence of the first cause and an abandonment of all sequences and phenomena to the laws of nature
Or to the other words that people may use is absolutely absurd
Now though there is great difficulty in understanding all the passages of Antoninus in which he speaks of nature of the changes of
Things and of the economy of the universe. I am convinced that his sense of nature and natural is the same as that which I have stated and
As he was a man who knew how to use words in a clear way and with a strict consistency
We ought to assume even if his meaning in some passages is doubtful that his view of nature was in harmony with his fixed belief
In the all-pervading ever-present and ever active energy of God
There is much in Antoninus that is hard to understand and it might be said that he did not fully
Apprehend all that he wrote which would however be in no way remarkable for it happens now that a man may write what neither
He nor anybody can understand
Antoninus tells us to look at things and see what they are
Resolving them into the material the causal and the relation or the purpose by which he seems to mean something in nature
What did we call effect or end?
The word cause is the difficulty
There is the same word in the Sanskrit and the subtle philosophers of India and of Greece and the less subtle philosophers of modern times
Have all used this word or an equivalent word in a vague way
Yet the confusion sometimes may be the inevitable ambiguity of language rather than in the mind of the writer
For I cannot think that some of the wisest of men did not know what they intended to say when Antoninus says that quote
everything that exists is in a manner of the seed of that which will be and
Quote he might be supposed to say what some of the Indian philosophers have said and thus a profound truth
Might be converted into a gross absurdity
But he says quote in a manner and quote and in a manner
He said true and in another manner if you mistake his meaning he said false
When Plato said quote nothing ever is but is always becoming and quote
He delivered a text out of which we may derive something for he destroys by it not all practical
But all speculative notions of cause and effect the whole series of things as they appear to us must be contemplated in time
That is in succession and we conceive or suppose intervals between one state of things in another state of things
So that there is priority in sequence and interval and being and is ceasing to be and beginning and ending
But there is nothing of this kind in the nature of things
It is an everlasting continuity
When Antoninus speaks of generation he speaks of one cause acting and then another cause taking up the work
Which the former left in a certain state and so on and we might conceive that he had some notion like what has been called quote
the self-evolving power of nature and quote a fine phrase indeed the full import of which I believe that the writer of it did not see
And thus he laid himself open to the imputation of being a follower of one of the Hindu sects
Which makes all things come by evolution out of nature a matter or out of something which takes the place of the deity, but is not deity
I would have all men think as they please or as they can and I only claim the same freedom which I give
When a man writes anything we may fairly try to find out all that his words must mean
Even if the result is that they mean what he did not mean and if we find this contradiction
It is not our fault
But his misfortune now Antoninus is perhaps somewhat in a condition in what he says though
He speaks at the end of the paragraph of the power which acts unseen by the eyes, but still no less clearly
But whether in this passage he means the power is conceived to be in different successive causes or in something else. Nobody can tell
From other passages
However, I do collect that his notion of the phenomena of the universe is what I have stated
The deity works unseen if we may use such language and perhaps I may as job did or he wrote the book of job
Quote in him we live and move and are end quote said saint paul to the athenians
And to show his bearers that this was no new doctrine. He quoted the greek poets
One of these poets was the stoic cleanthes whose noble hymn to zeus or god is an elevated expression of devotion and philosophy
It deprives nature of her power and puts her under the immediate government of the deity
quote
The all this heaven which whirls around the earth obeys and willing follows where thou leadest without thee god
Nothing is done on earth nor in the ethereal realms nor in the sea save what the wicked through their folly do end quote
Antoninus conviction of the existence of a divine power and government was founded on his perception of the order of the universe
Like socrates he says that though we cannot see the form of divine powers. We know that they exist because we see their works
quote
To those who asked where hast thou seen the gods or how dost thou comprehend that they exist and so worship with them?
I answer in the first place that they may be seen even with the eyes in the second place
Neither have I seen my own soul and yet I honor it
Thus then with respect to the gods from what I constantly experience of their power from this
I comprehend that they exist and I venerate them end quote
This is a very old argument, which has always had great weight with most people and has appeared sufficient
It does not acquire the least additional strength by being developed in the learned treatise
It is as intelligible and its simple enunciation as it can be made
If it is rejected, there is no arguing with him who rejects it
And if it is worked out into innumerable particulars, the value of the evidence runs the risk of being buried under a mass of words
Man being conscious that he has a spiritual power or intellectual power or that he has such a power in whatever way
He conceives that he has it for I wish simply to state a fact from this power which he has in himself
He has led as Antoninus says to believe that there is a greater power
Which as the old stoics tell us pervades the whole universe as the intellect pervades man
God exists then but what do we know of his nature?
Antoninus says that the soul of man is an efflux from the divinity
We have bodies like animals, but we have reason intelligence as the gods
Animals have life and what we call instincts are natural principles of action, but the rational animal man alone has rational intelligence soul
Antoninus insists on this continually god is in man and so he must constantly attend to the divinity within us
For it is only in this way that we can have any knowledge of the nature of god
The human soul is in a sense a portion of the divinity and the soul alone has any communication with the deity for as he says
Quote with his intellectual part alone god touches the intelligence only which has flowed and has been derived from himself into these bodies
End quote. In fact, he says that which is hidden within a man is life
That is the man himself all the rest is vesture covering organs instrument
Which the living man the real man uses for purposes of his present existence
The air is universally diffused for him who is able to respire and so for him who is willing to partake of it
The intelligent power which holds within it all things is diffused as wide and as free as the air
It is by living a divine life that man approaches to a knowledge of the divinity
It is by following the divinity within
As Antoninus calls it that man comes nearest to the deity the supreme good
For a man can never attain a perfect agreement with his internal guide
Quote live with the gods
And he does live with the gods who constantly shows them that his own soul is satisfied with that which is assigned to him
And that it does all the demon wishes which sues hath given to every man for his guardian and guide a portion of himself
And this demon is every man's understanding and reason end quote
There is in man
That is in the reason the intelligence a superior faculty which have exercised rules all the rest
This is the ruling faculty which Cicero renders by the latin word principatus
Quote to which nothing can or ought to be superior end quote
Antoninus often uses this term in others which are equivalent he names it quote the governing intelligence end quote
The governing faculty is the master of the soul a man must reverence only his ruling faculty and the divinity within him
As we must reverence that which is supreme in the universe
So we must reverence that which is supreme in ourselves and this is that which of the like kind
With that which is the supreme in the universe
So
As platinus says the soul of man can only know the divine so far as it knows itself
in one passage
Antoninus speaks of a man's condemnation of himself when the diviner part within him has been
Overpowered and yields to the less honorable and to the perishable part the body and its gross pleasures
In a word the views of Antoninus on this matter
However, his expressions may vary are exactly what bishop butler expresses when he speaks of quote the natural supremacy of the reflection or conscious
End quote of the faculty quote which surveys approves or disapproves the several affectations of our mind and actions of our lives
end quote
Much matter might be collected from Antoninus on the notion of the universe being one animated being
But all that he says amounts to no more is Schultz remarks than this
The soul of man is most intimately united to his body and together they make one animal which we call man
So the deity is most intimately united to the world or the material universe and together they form one whole
But Antoninus did not view god in the material universe as the same any more than he viewed the body and soul of man as one
Antoninus has no speculations on the absolute nature of the deity
It was not his fashion to waste his time on what a man cannot understand
He was satisfied that god exists that he governs all things that man can only have an imperfect knowledge of his nature
And he must attain this imperfect knowledge by reverencing the divinity which is within him and keeping it pure
From all that has been said it follows that the universe is administered by the providence of god and that all things are wisely ordered
There are passages in which Antoninus expresses doubts or states different possible theories of the constitution and government of the universe
But he always recurs to his fundamental principle that if we admit the existence of a deity
We must also admit that he orders all things wisely and well
Epictetus says that we can discern the providence which rules the world if we possess two things
The power of seeing all that happens with respect to each thing
and a grateful disposition
But if all things are wisely ordered
How is the world so full of what we call evil physical and moral if instead of saying that there is evil in the world
We use the expression which I have used to quote what we call evil end quote. We have partly anticipated the emperor's answer
We see and feel and know imperfectly very few things in the few years that we live
And all the knowledge and all the experience of all the human race is positive ignorance of the whole which is infinite
Now as our reason teaches us that everything is in some way related to and connected with every other thing
All notion of evil as being in the universe of things is a contradiction
For if the whole comes from and is covered by an intelligent being
It is impossible to conceive anything in it which tends to the evil or destruction of the whole
Everything is in constant mutation and yet the whole subsists
We might imagine the solar system resolved into its elemental parts
And yet the whole would still subsist quote ever young and perfect end quote
All things all forms are dissolved and new forms appear all living things undergo the changes we call death
If we call death an evil then all change is an evil
Living beings also suffer pain and man suffers most of all for he suffers both in and by his body and by his intelligent part
Men suffer also from one another and perhaps the largest part of human suffering comes to man from those whom he calls his brothers
Antoninus says quote
Generally wickedness does no harm at all to the universe and particularly the wickedness of one man does no harm to another
It is only harmful to him who has it in his power to be released from it as soon as he shall choose end quote
The first part of this is perfectly consistent with the doctrine that the whole can sustain no evil or harm
The second part must be explained by the stoic principle that there is no evil in anything which is not in our power
What wrong we suffer from another is his evil not ours
But this is an admission that there is evil in a sort
For he who does wrong does evil and if others can endure the wrong still there's evil in the wrongdoer
Antoninus gives many excellent precepts with respect to wrongs and injuries and his precepts are practical
He teaches us to bear what we cannot avoid and his lessons may be just as useful to him who denies the being and the government
Is god as to him who believes in both?
There is no direct answer in Antoninus to the objections which may be made to the existence and providence of god because of the moral
Disorder and suffering which are in the world except this answer which he makes in reply to the supposition that even the best men
May be extinguished by death
He says if it is so we may be sure that if it ought to have been otherwise the gods would have ordered it otherwise
His conviction of the wisdom which we may observe in the government of the world is too strong to be disturbed
by any apparent irregularities in the order of things
That these disorders exist is a fact
And those would conclude from them against the being and government of god conclude too hastily
We all admit that there is an order in the material world a nature in the sense in which the world has been explained
A constitution what we call a system a relation of parts to one another and a fitness for the whole for something
So in the constitution of plants and animals there is an order a fitness for some end
Sometimes the order as we conceive it is interrupted and the end as we conceive it is not attained
The seed the plant or the animal sometimes perishes before it is passed through all its changes and done all its uses
It is according to nature
That is a fixed order for some to perish early and for others to do all their uses and leave successors to take their place
So man has a corporeal and intellectual and moral constitution fit for certain uses and on the whole man performs
These uses dies and leaves other men in his place
So society exists and a social state is manifestly the natural state of man the state for which his nature fits him
And society amidst innumerable irregularities and disorders still subsists
And perhaps we may say that the history of the past and our present knowledge
Give us a reasonable hope that its disorders will diminish and that order its governing principle may be more firmly established
As order then a fixed order we may say subject to deviations real or apparent must be admitted to exist in the whole of nature
Of things that which we call disorder or evil as it seems to us
Does not in any way alter the fact of the general constitution of things having a nature or fixed order
Nobody will conclude from the existence of disorder that order is not the rule
For the existence of order both physical and moral is proved by daily experience in all past experience
We cannot conceive how the order of the universe is maintained
We cannot even conceive how our own life from day to day is continued nor how we perform the simplest movements of the body
Nor how we grow and think and act that we know many of the conditions which are necessary for all these functions
Knowing nothing then the unseen power which acts in ourselves except by what is done
We know nothing of the power which acts through what we call all time in all space
But seeing that there is a nature or fixed order in all things known to us
It is conformable to the nature of our minds to believe that this universal nature has a cause which operates continually
And that we are totally unable to speculate on the reason of any of those disorders or evils which we perceive
This I believe is the answer which may be collected from all that Antoninus has said
The origin of evil is an old question
Achilles tells Priam that Zeus has two casks
One filled with good things and the other with bad
And that he gives to men out of each according to his pleasure and so we must be content for we cannot alter the will of Zeus
One of the greek commentators asked how we must reconcile this doctrine with what we find in the first book of the odyssey
Where the king of the god says men say evil comes to them from us, but they bring it on themselves through their own folly
The answer is plain enough even to the greek commentator
The poets make both achilles and zeus speak appropriately to their several characters
Indeed zeus says plainly that men do attribute their sufferings to the gods
But they do it falsely for they are the cause of their own sorrows
Epictetus and his encheridion make short work of the question of evil. He says quote
As a mark is not set up for the purpose of missing it. So neither does the nature of evil exist in the universe end quote
This will appear obscure enough to those who are not acquainted with epictetus, but he always knows what he is talking about
We do not set up a mark in order to miss it though. We may miss it
God whose existence epictetus assumes has not ordered all things so that his purpose shall fail
Whatever there may be of what we call evil the nature of evil as he expresses it does not exist
That is evil is not part of the constitution or nature of things
If there were a principle of evil in the constitution of things evil would no longer be evil as simplicius argues
But evil would be good
Simplicius has a long and curious discourse on this text of epictetus and it is amusing and instructive
One passage more will conclude this matter
It contains all that the emperor could say quote to go from among men
If there are gods, it's not a thing to be afraid of for the gods will not involve thee in evil
But if indeed they do not exist or if they have no concern about human affairs
What is it to me to live in a universe devoid of gods or devoid of providence?
But in truth they do exist and they do care for human things and they have put all the mean in man's power to enable
Him not to fall into real evils
And as to the rest if there was anything evil they would have provided for this also that it should be altogether in a man's power
not to fall into it
But that which does not make a man worse
How can it make a man's life worse?
But neither through ignorance nor having the knowledge but not the power to guard against or correct these things
Is it possible that the nature of the universe has overlooked them?
Nor is it possible that it has made so great a mistake either if you want the power or want the skill that good and even
Indiscriminately to the good and the bad
But death certainly and life honor and dishonor pain and pleasure all these things equally happen to good and bad men
Being things which make us neither better nor worse. Therefore. They are neither good nor evil
end quote
The ethical part of Antoninus's philosophy follows from his general principles
The end of all his philosophy is to live conformably to nature both a man's own nature and the nature of the universe
Bishop butler has explained what the greek philosophers meant when they spoke of living according to nature
And he says that when it is explained as he has explained it and as they understood it
It is quote a manner of speaking not loose and undetermined but clear and distinct strictly just and true
end quote
To live according to nature is to live according to a man's whole nature
Not according to a part of it and to reverence the divinity within him as the governor of all his actions quote
To the rational animal the same act is according to nature and according to reason end quote
That which is done contrary to reason is also an act contrary to nature
to the whole nature
Though it is certainly conformable to some part of man's nature or it could not be done
Man is made for action not for idleness or pleasure as plants and animals do the uses of their nature. So man must do his
Man must also live conformably to the universal nature conformable to the nature of all things of which he is one and
As a citizen of a political community, he must direct his life and actions with reference to those among whom and for whom
Among other purposes he lives
A man must not retire into solitude and cut himself off from his fellow men
He must be ever active to do his part in the great whole all men are his kin not only in blood
But still more by participating in the same intelligence and by being a portion of the same divinity
A man cannot really be injured by his brethren for no act of theirs can make him bad
And he must not be angry with them nor hate them
quote
For we are made for cooperation like feet like hands like eyelids like the rows of the upper and lower teeth
To act against one another then is contrary to nature
And it is acting against one another to be vexed and to turn away
end quote
Further he says quote take pleasure in one thing and rest in it in passing from one social act to another social act
thinking of god
end quote again
quote love mankind
Follow god end quote
It is the characteristic of the rational soul for man to love his neighbor
Antoninus teaches in various passages the forgiveness of injuries and we know that he also practiced what he taught
Bishop butler remarks that quote this divine precept to forgive injuries and to love our enemies
Though to be met with genteel moralist yet is in a particular sense a precept of christianity as our savior has insisted more upon it
Than on any other single virtue end quote
The practice of this precept is the most difficult of all virtues
Antoninus often enforces it and gives us aid towards following it when we are injured
We feel anger and resentment and the feeling is natural just and useful for the conservation of society
It is useful that wrongdoers should feel the natural consequences of their actions among which is the disapprobation of society
And the resentment of him who is wronged
But revenge in the proper sense of that word must not be practiced
Quote the best way of avenging thyself end quote says the emperor quote is not to become like the wrongdoer end quote
It is plain by this that he does not mean that we should in any case practice revenge
But he says to those who talk of revenging wrongs be not like him who has done the wrong
Socrates in the credo says the same in other words in saint paul quote when a man has done the any wrong
Immediately consider with what opinion about good or evil he has done wrong
For when that has seen this that will pity him and won't neither wonder nor be angry end quote
Antoninus would not deny that wrong naturally produces the feeling of anger and resentment for this is implied in the recommendation to reflect
On the nature of the man's mind who has done the wrong and then you will have pity instead of resentment
And so it comes to the same as saint paul's advice to be angry and sin not which as butler well explains it
It's not a recommendation to be angry which nobody needs for anger is a natural passion
But it is a warning against allowing anger to lead us into sin
In short the emperor's doctrine about wrongful acts is this
Wrongdoers do not know what good and bad are they offend out of ignorance and in the sense of the stoics. This is true
Though this kind of ignorance will never be admitted as a legal excuse and ought not to be admitted as a full excuse in any way
By society there may be grievous injuries such as it is in a man's power to forgive without harm to society
And if he forgives because he sees that his enemies know not what they do
He is acting in the spirit of the sublime prayer quote father forgive them for they know not what they do end quote
The emperor's moral philosophy was not a feeble narrow system
Which teaches man to look directly to his own happiness though a man's happiness or tranquility is indirectly promoted by living as he ought to do
A man must live conformably to the universal nature
Which means as the emperor explains it in many passages that a man's action must be conformable to his true
Relations to all other human beings both as a citizen of a political community and as a member of the whole human family
This implies and he often expresses it in the most forcible language that a man's words and actions so far as they affect others
Must be measured by a fixed rule
Which is their consistency with the conservation and the interests of the particular society of which he is a member and of the whole human race
To live conformably to such a rule
A man must use his rational faculties in order to discern clearly the consequences and full effect of all his actions and of the actions of others
He must not live a life of contemplation and reflection only though
He must often retire within himself to calm and purify his soul by thought but he must mingle in the work of man
And be a fellow laborer for the general good
A man should have an object or purpose in life that he may direct all his energies to it, of course a good object
He who is not one object or purpose of life cannot be one in the same all through his life
Bacon has a remark to the same effect on the best means of quote reducing of the mind unto virtue and good estate
Which is the electing and propounding unto a man's self-good and virtuous ends of his life
Such as may be in a reasonable sort within his compass to attain end quote
He is a happy man who has been wise enough to do this when he was young and has had the opportunities
But the emperor seeing well that a man cannot always be so wise in his youth
Encourages him to do it when he can and not to let his life slip away before he has begun
He who can propose to himself good and virtuous ends of life and be true to them cannot fail to live conformably to his own interest
And universal interest for in the nature of things they are one
If a thing is not good for the hive, it is not good for the bee
One passage may end this matter
Quote if the gods have determined about me and about the things which must happen to me
They have determined well for it is not easy even to imagine a deity without forethought
And as to doing me harm
Why should they have any desire towards that for what advantage would result to them for this or to the whole?
Which is the special object of their providence
But if they have not determined about me individually they have certainly determined about the whole at least
And the things which happen by way of sequence in this general arrangement I ought to accept with pleasure and to be content with them
But if they determine about nothing
Which it is wicked to believe or if we do believe it let us neither sacrifice nor pray nor swear by them nor do anything else
Which we do as if the gods were present and lived with us
But if however the gods determine about none of these things which concern us I am able to determine about myself
And I can inquire about that which is useful and that is useful to every man
Which is conformable to his own constitution and nature
But my nature is rational and social and my city and country so far as I am Antoninus is Rome
But so far as I am a man it is the world
The things then which are useful to these cities are alone useful to me
It would be tedious and it is not necessary to state that the emperor's opinions on all the ways in which a man may profitably use
His understanding towards perfecting himself in practical virtue the passages to this purpose are in all parts of his book
But as they are in no order or connection a man must use the book a long time before he will find out all that is in it
A few words may be added here
If we analyze all other things we find how insufficient they are for human life and how truly worthless many of them are
Virtue alone is indivisible one and perfectly satisfying
The notion of virtue cannot be considered vague or unsettled
Because a man may find it difficult to explain the notion fully to himself or to expound it to others in such a way to prevent
Conveiling virtue is a whole and no more consists of parts than man's intelligence does and yet
We speak of various intellectual faculties as convenient way of expressing the various powers
Which man's intellect shows by his works in the same way
We may speak of various virtues or parts of virtue in a practical sense
For the purpose of showing what particular virtues we ought to practice in order to exercise of the whole of virtue
That is as much as man's nature is capable of
The prime principle in man's constitution is social
The next in orders is not to yield to the persuasions of the body when they are not conformable to the rational principle
Which must govern the third is freedom from error and from deception quote
Let then the ruling principle holding fast to these things go straight on
And it has what is its own end quote
The emperor selects justice as the virtue which is the basis of all the rest and this had been said long before his time
It is true that all people have some notion of what is meant by justice as a disposition of the mind
And some notion about acting and conformity to this disposition
But experience shows that men's notions about justice are as confused as their actions are inconsistent with the true notion of justice
The emperor's notion of justice is clear enough, but not practical enough for all mankind quote
Let there be freedom from perturbations with respect to the things which come from the external cause
And let there be justice in the things done by virtue of the internal cause
That is let there be a movement and action terminating in this and social acts for this is according to thy nature
End quote in another place. He says that quote
He who acts unjustly acts impiously end quote
Which follows of course from all that he says in various places
He insists on the practice of truth as a virtue and as a means to virtue
Which it no doubt is for lying even in indifferent things weakens the understanding and lying maliciously
Is as great a moral offense as man can be guilty of viewed both as showing an habitual disposition and viewed with respect to consequences
He couples the notion of justice with action
A man must not pride himself on having some fine notion of justice in his head, but he must exhibit his just in an act
Like saint james notion of faith
But this is enough
The stoics and Antoninus among them call some things beautiful and some ugly
And as they are beautiful, so they are good and as they are ugly so they are evil or bad
All these things good and evil are in our power. Absolutely
Some of the stricter stoics would say in a manner only as those who would not depart altogether from common sense would say
Practically they are to a great degree in the power of some persons and in some circumstances
But in a small degree only in other persons and in other circumstances
The stoics maintain man's free will as to the things which are in his power for as to the things which are out of his power
Free will terminating inaction is of course excluded by the very terms of the expression
I hardly know if we can discover exactly Antoninus notion of the free will of man
Nor is the question worth the inquiry
What he does mean and does say is intelligible
All the things which are not in our power are indifferent. They are neither good nor bad morally
Such are life health wealth power disease poverty and death
Life and death are all men's portion health wealth power disease and poverty happen to men indifferently to the good and to the bad
To those who live according to nature and to those who do not
quote life
Says the emperor is a warfare and a stranger's children and after fame is oblivion end quote
After speaking of those men who have disturbed the world and then died and of the death of philosophers such as heraclitus and democratus
Who was destroyed by lice and of socrates?
Whom other lice his enemies destroyed he says quote what means all this thou has embarked thou has made the voyage
Thou art come to shore get out if indeed to another life. There is no want of gods not even there
But if to a state without sensation that will cease to be held by pains and pleasures
And to be a slave to the vessel which is as much inferior to that which serves it as superior
For the one is intelligence and deity the other is earth and corruption end quote
It is not death that man should fear, but he should fear never beginning to live according to his nature
Every man should live in such a way as to discharge his duty and to trouble himself about nothing else
He should live such a life that he shall always be ready for death and shall depart content when the summon comes
for what is death quote
a cessation of the impressions through the senses and of the pulling of the strings which move the appetites and of the
discursive movements of the thoughts and of the service to the flesh
End quote death is such as generation is a mystery of nature
In another passage the exact meaning of which is perhaps doubtful
He speaks of the child which leaves the womb and so he says the soul at death leaves its envelope
As the child is born or comes into life by leaving the womb
So the soul may on leaving the body pass into another existence, which is perfect
I'm, not sure if this is the emperor's meaning
Antoninus's opinion of a future life is nowhere clearly expressed
His doctrine of the nature of the soul of necessity implies that it does not perish absolutely for a portion of divinity cannot perish
The opinion is at least as old as the time of epicharmus and europides
What comes from the earth goes back to the earth and what comes from heaven the divinity returns to him who gave it
But I find nothing clear in Antoninus as to the notion of the man existing after death
So as to be conscious of his sameness with the soul which occupied his vessel of clay
He seemed to be perplexed on this matter and finally to have rested in this
That god or the gods will do whatever is best and consistent with the university of things
Nor I think does he speak conclusively on another stoic doctrine which some stoics practice
The anticipating the regular course of nature by man's own act
The reader will find some passages in which this is touched on and he may make of them what he can
But there are passages in which the emperor encourages himself to wait for the end patiently and with tranquility
And certainly it is consistent with all his best teaching that a man should bear all that falls to his lot and do useful acts as long as he lives
He should not therefore abridge the time of his usefulness by his own act
Whether he contemplates any possible cases in which a man should die by his own hand
I cannot tell and the matter is not worth the curious inquiry for I believe it would not lead to any certain result
As to his opinion on this point
I do not think that Antoninus who never mentioned Seneca though
He must have known all about him would have agreed with Seneca when he gives us a reason for suicide
That the eternal law whatever he means has made nothing better for us than this
That it has given us only one way of entering life and many ways of going out of it
The ways of going out indeed are many and that is a good reason for a man taking care of himself
Happiness was not the direct object of a stoic's life
There is no rule of life contained in the precept that a man should pursue his own happiness
Many men think that they are seeking happiness when they are only seeking the gratification of some particular passion the strongest that they have
The end of a man is as already explained to live conformably to nature
And he will thus obtain happiness tranquility of mind and contentment
As a means of living conformably to nature he must study the four chief virtues each of which has its proper sphere
wisdom or the knowledge of good and evil
Justice or the giving to every man has due
Fortitude or the enduring of labor and pain and temperance which is moderation in all things
By thus living conformably to nature the stoic obtained all that he wished or expected
His reward was in his virtuous life and he was satisfied with that
Some greek poet long ago wrote
quote
For virtue only of all human things takes reward not from the hands of others
Virtue herself rewards the toils of virtue
end quote
Some of the stoics indeed express themselves in very arrogant absurd terms about the wise man's self-sufficiency
They elevated him to the rank of a deity
These were only talkers and lecturers such as those in all ages who utter fine words knowing little of human affairs and caring only for notoriety
Epictetus and Antoninus both by precept and example labor to improve themselves and others
And if we discover imperfections in their teaching
We must still honor these great men who attempted to show that there is in a man's nature
And in the constitution of things sufficient reason for living a virtuous life
It is difficult enough to live as we ought to live difficult even for any man to live in such a way as to satisfy himself
If he exercises only in a moderate degree the power of reflecting upon and reviewing his own conduct
And if all men cannot be brought to the same opinions and morals and religion
It is at least worthwhile to give them good reasons for as much as they can be persuaded to accept
And
Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus section 14
The philosophy of Antoninus by george long
End of meditations of Marcus Aurelius
You